layout: page
title: "Global Sequencing Fund"
permalink: /sequencing-fund/

# COVID-19 is global. Sequencing it should be too.

At Nextstrian, we depend on sequences generated by the hard work of labs around the world, who then share this data publicly on [GISAID](https://www.gisaid.org/).
The world has never seen so many sequences generated so rapidly and shared so quickly as now.
However, there are still many countries and areas around the world for which we have no full-length, high quality sequencing.
A prime example is Iran - despite the devestating outbreak there, no full-genomes are available, seriously limiting local and global efforts to better understand how and when the outbreak may have started and how it spread both within and between other countries.

With the advent of relatively cheap and efficient sequenicng techniques, like Oxford Nanopore's minION range, sequencing is now more transportable, more easily maintainable, and more available, than ever before.
However, a sequencer can only run with the appropriate reagents and use-limited 'kit' (which degrades over time and so must be replaced).
Without these vital pieces, a lab can have the samples, expertise, and minION, Illumina, or other sequencing base equipment ready to start producing SARS-CoV-2 genomes - but stand unused for weeks or months. 

The start of an epidemic is one of the most critical times to collect sequences: these unique dynamics are hard to capture after-the-fact, and countries need as much data as possible in order to make appropriate decisions about social distancing, border closures, and lockdowns.
Many of these centres are likely to be funded in future by local or governmental funding schemes, but will not be able to start processing critical samples *now*.
Our aim is to provide enough money, quickly, to ensure that labs are not limited by reagents & kit, and can start uploading sequences for other scientists to use, as soon as possible.

In partnership with Fred Hutch, we've created an initiative to get labs enough money to cover the cost of reagents & kit to run about ~100 samples over the next few months.
This is intended as 'bridge' funding to ensure sequences can be generated at this important time - during the growth and peak of the epidemic - while labs apply for grants.

**Read more about the idea behind our initiative [here](https://www.fredhutch.org/en/news/center-news/2020/03/support-nextstrain-covid-19-mapping.html)**

**Donate [here](https://www.fredhutch.org/en/ways-to-give/direct-your-gift/support-coronavirus-research.html)**

## How does sequencing help?

Sequencing helps...
Sequencing is vital in a couple of different ways.

### Globally
Sequencing helps us better understand how the virus is spreading between the within countries - without having to interview everyone with the virus. 

### Locally
Sequencing can be critical at the beginning and end of an epidemic to figure out whether transmission is local or imported.
For example, if we detected 5 cases in Townsville today, it's really important to know whether these are from people who have arrived from 'high risk' areas - infected elsewhere and then arrived here - or whether these infections were transmitted right here in our community.
Testing alone can struggle to distinguish these two, especially as sample numbers rise. 

At the beginning of the epidemic, this important to decide what measures to take. 
If transmission is mostly being imported (the sequences are separate in the tree, and link to other countries or areas), then we might focus on what we can do to stop or isolate these imported cases.
If transmission is mostly local (the sequences cluster really tightly in the tree), then we need to switch to measures like social distancing, isolation, increased testing, and possibly lockdowns - as we've seen in the past few weeks. 

At the end of an epidemic, this same difference in imported or local cases can help us evaluate if our local containment measures are working.
Cases might still be imported from other high-risk areas, despite our own local efforts, but as long as we can detect and isolate these, there's no reason to modify our local interventions.
However, if indications are that the cases due to local transmission, this might be an indicator that the measures that are implemented are not doing well enough - we may need to step up testing, or temporarily go back to lockdown measures.
This also allows for more *targeted* intervention - we can tell the difference between sequences being transmitted within one city or across the country - allowing us to take measures that just apply to the affected cities or regions, without needing to put restrictions back on the larger population - allowing social and economic recovery to continue on a larger scale, while we contain smaller areas where attention is needed.

### Long-term

#### Vaccine resistance

#### Drug resistance 

